What’s your one top tip for doing a deal? Be genuine in who you are as a person and  in the service you offer. Authenticity creates trust; relationships are built on trust. What was your first job?   My first job was as a waiter at a  pizzeria in Ellis Park, across the road from where the band U2 were playing, it was total mayhem! I was 13 years old.  Though this was a  one-off job, it was a straight dive into the deep end. My first  full-time job was as a sales person for a furniture shop. How much was your first  pay cheque, and how did you spend it? If I recall correctly it was about R1,800. I was never really a  “saver” growing up. I only  learnt the value of saving later in life. So, after receiving my  pay cheque I probably squandered it on entertainment,  though I always gave a portion of my earnings to charity. I am a strong believer that a portion of one’s earnings should be given to someone in need. What  is the one thing you wish somebody had told you when you were starting out? Stop waiting for purpose, create purpose. If you could fix only one thing in SA, what would it be? Education. I am concerned by the significant amount of people in SA who do not possess a skill. What’s the most interesting thing about you that people don’t know? I recently took up long distance running and have already completed several half marathons. What is the one investment you wish you had made, or made earlier? I must confess … I have developed a book shopping addiction. I wish I had started reading earlier. Until the age of 35, I think I had read and finished only two books. To invest in yourself with knowledge and become aware of your limitations and spaces for growth is life changing. What is the hardest life lesson you’ve learnt so far? That life is short and that each moment is precious. What is something you would go back and tell your younger self that would impress them? That everything you ever wanted, you have. I have health, an amazing wife, beautiful healthy children. In addition, I have an income and I have my own business. If you were  President Cyril Ramaphosa, what would you change, or do, tomorrow? If I were president, I would approach all medium to large private corporates and invite them in partnership to have more of a stake in running the economy. There would be greater accountability and less corruption. 